# Literature Cited {#literature-cited .SteefelHeading1}

Aagaard P. and Helgeson H.C. (1982) Thermodynamic and kinetic
constraints on reaction rates among minerals and aqueous solutions, I,
Theoretical considerations. *Amer. J. Sci.* , 237-285.

Aris R. (1965) Prolegomena to the rational analysis of systems of
chemical reactions. *Arch. Rational Mech. and Anal.* , 81-99.

Bear J. (1972) *Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media*. American Elsevier,
New York, 764 p.

Bear J. (1979) *Hydraulics of Groundwater*. McGraw--Hill, New York, 569
p.

Berner R.A. (1980) *Early Diagenesis: A Theoretical Approach*. Princeton
Univ. Press, Princeton, 241p.

Bowen R.M. (1968) On the stoichiometry of chemically reacting materials.
*Arch. Rational Mech. Anal.* , 114-124.

Bruges E.A., Latto B., and Ray A.K. (1966) New correlations and tables
of the coefficient of viscosity of water and steam up to 1000 bar and
1000$\ ^{\circ}$C. *Internat. Jour. Heat and Mass Transfer* , 465-480.

Daus A.D. and Frind E.O. (1985) An alternating direction Galerkin
technique for simulation of contaminant transport in complex groundwater
systems *Water Resources Res.* , 653-664.

Dullien F.A.L. (1979) *Porous Media*. Academic Press, San Diego, 396 p.

Frind E.O. and Germain D. (1986) Simulation of contaminant plumes with
large dispersive contrast: Evaluation of alternating direction Galerkin
models. *Water Resources Res.* , , 1857-1873.

Gupta, A.D., Lake, L.W., Pope, G.A., Sephernoori, K., and King, M.J.
(1991). High--resolution monotonic schemes for reservoir fluid flow
simulation. *In Situ.*, , 289-317.

Helgeson H.C. (1968) Evaluation of irreversible reactions in geochemical
processes involving minerals and aqueous solutions-I. Thermodynamic
relations. *Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta* , 853-877.

Helgeson H.C. (1979) Mass transfer among minerals and hydrothermal
solutions. In *Geochemistry of Hydrothermal Ore Deposits* (ed. H.L.
Barnes), John Wiley and Sons, New York, 568-610.

Helgeson H.C. and Kirkham D.H. (1974) Theoretical predictions of the
thermodynamic behavior of aqueous electrolytes at high pressures and
temperatures; I: Summary of the thermodynamic/electrostatic properties
of the solvent. *Amer. J. Sci.* , 1089-1198.

Helgeson H.C., Garrels R.M., and MacKenzie F.T. (1969) Evaluation of
irreversible reactions in geochemical processes involving minerals and
aqueous solutions-II. Applications. *Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta* ,
455-482.

Hindmarsh, A.C. (1977) Solution of block--tridiagonal systems of linear
algebraic equations. UCID-30150.

Hooyman G.J. (1961) On thermodynamic coupling of chemical reactions.
*Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.* , 1169-1173.

Jin, Q., and C. M. Bethke (2005), Predicting the rate of microbial
respiration in geochemical environments, *Geochimica et Cosmochimica
Acta*, 69(5), 1133--1143, doi:10.1016/j.gca.2004.08.010.

Johnson J. W., Oelkers E. H. and Helgeson H. C. (1992) *SUPCRT92:* A
software package for calculating the standard molal thermodynamic
properties of minerals, gases, aqueous species, and reactions from 1 to
5000 bars and 0$\ ^{\circ}$ to 1000$\ ^{\circ}$ C, *Computers in
Geosciences*, in press.

Kirkner D.J. and Reeves H. (1988) Multicomponent mass transport with
homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical reactions: Effect of chemistry on
the choice of numerical algorithm. I. Theory. *Water Resources Res.* ,
1719-1729.

Lapidus L. and Pinder G.F. (1982) *Numerical Solution of Partial
Differential Equations in Science and Engineering*, John Wiley and Sons,
New York, 677 p.

Lasaga A.C. (1981) Rate laws in chemical reactions. In *Kinetics of
Geochemical Processes* (ed. A.C. Lasaga and R.J. Kirkpatrick), Rev.
Mineral. , 135-169.

Lasaga A.C. (1984) Chemical kinetics of water-rock interactions. *J.
Geophys. Res.* , 4009-4025.

Lichtner P.C. (1985) Continuum model for simultaneous chemical reactions
and mass transport in hydrothermal systems. *Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta* ,
779-800.

Lichtner P.C. (1988) The quasi-stationary state approximation to coupled
mass transport and fluid-rock interaction in a porous medium. *Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta* , 143-165.

Lichtner P.C. (1992) Time--space continuum description of fluid/rock
interaction in permeable media. *J. Geophys. Res.* , 3135-3155.

Marsily G.de (1986) *Quantitative Hydrogeology*. Acad. Press, New York,
440 p.

Molins, S., J. Greskowiak, C. Wanner, and K. U. Mayer (2015), A
benchmark for microbially mediated chromium reduction under denitrifying
conditions in a biostimulation column experiment, *Comput Geosci*,
19(3), 479--496, doi:10.1007/s10596-014-9432-0.

Patankar S.V. (1980) *Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow*.
Hemisphere Publ., New York, 197 p.

Patel M.K., Cross M., and Markatos N.C. (1988) An assessment of flow
oriented schemes for reducing 'false diffusion'. *Int. Journ. Numerical
Methods in Engineering* , p. 2279-2304.

Press W.H., Flannery B.P., Teukolsky S.A., and Vetterling W.T. (1986)
*Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing*. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 818 p.

Reed M.H. (1982) Calculation of multicomponent chemical equilibria and
reaction processes in systems involving minerals, gases, and an aqueous
phase. *Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta* , 513-528.

Steefel C.I. (1992) Coupled fluid flow and chemical reaction: Model
development and application to water--rock interaction. Ph.D. thesis,
New Haven, Connecticut, Yale University, 234 p.

Steefel C.I. and Lasaga A.C. (1990) Evolution of dissolution patterns:
Permeability change due to coupled flow and reaction. In *Chemical
Modeling in Aqueous Systems II* (ed. D.C. Melchior and R.L. Bassett),
ACS Symp. Ser. No. 416, 212-225.

Steefel C.I. and Lasaga A.C. (1992) Putting transport into water--rock
interaction models. *Geology* , 680-684.

Steefel C.I. and Lasaga A.C. (1994) A coupled model for transport of
multiple chemical species and kinetic precipitation/dissolution
reactions with application to reactive flow in single phase hydrothermal
systems. *American Journal of Science*, , 529-592.

Steefel C.I. and Lichtner P.C. (1994) Diffusion and reaction in rock
matrix bordering a hyperalkaline fluid-filled fracture. *Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta* , 3595-3612.

Steefel C.I. and Van Cappellen P. (1990) A new kinetic approach to
modeling water--rock interaction: The role of nucleation, precursors,
and Ostwald ripening. *Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta* , 2657--2677.

Strang, G.. (1968) On the construction and comparison of difference
schemes, *SIAM J. Numer. Anal.* , 506-517.

Valocchi, Albert J. and Malmstead, Michael (1992). Accuracy of operator
splitting for advection-dispersion-reaction problems. *Water Resources
Res.* bf 28, 1471.

VanderKwaak J.E., Forsyth P.A., MacQuarrie K.T.B., and Sudicky E.A.
(1995) WATSOLV Sparse Matrix Iterative Solver Package Versions 1.01.
Unpublished report, Waterloo Centre for Groundwater Research, University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada. 23 p.

Van Zeggeren F. and Storey S.H. (1970) *The Computation of Chemical
Equilibria*. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 176 p.

Walter A.L., Frind E.O., Blowes D.W., Ptacek C.J., and Molson J.W.
(1994). Modeling of multicomponent reactive transport in groundwater: 1.
Model development and evaluation. *Water Resources Res.* , 3137-3148.

Wolery T.J., Jackson K.J., Bourcier W.L., Bruton C.J., Viani B.E.,
Knauss K.G., and Delany J.M. (1990) Current status of the EQ3/6 software
package for geochemical modeling. In *Chemical Modeling in Aqueous
Systems II* (ed. D.C. Melchior and R.L. Bassett), ACS Symp. Ser. No.
416, 104-116.

Zysset, A., F. Stauffer, and T. Dracos. (1994). Modeling of chemically
reactive groundwater transport, *Water Resources Res.* , 2217-2228.