
## SECONDARY_SPECIES

The **SECONDARY_SPECIES** keyword block gives the user's choice of
secondary species for a particular problem. Secondary or "non-component"
species are those for which an equilibrium reaction relationship is
assumed with the primary species in the problem. In other words, the
secondary species can be written in terms of the set of primary species.
While the secondary species could be viewed as any species for which
there is a reaction relationship with the primary species, whether the
reaction is at equilibrium or kinetically controlled, in this code the
secondary species are used to imply on species where the reaction is
assumed to be at equilibrium. When a particular reaction is at
equilibrium, a secondary species can be written algebraically in terms
of the primary species concentrations and the equilibrium constant for
the reaction using a mass action expression. Thus, the species can be
mathematically eliminated as an independent unknown from the
conservation equations. In contrast, where the reaction is kinetically
controlled, a differential (as opposed to algebraic) equation is needed
to relate the species to the other species in the problem.

#### Database Format

As with the primary species described above, a distinction must be made
between secondary species in the database versus secondary species
specified by the user in the input file. The "database secondary
species" block follows the primary species block and is initiated with
the line marking the end of the "database primary species" block:

    'End of primary' 0.0 0.0 0.0

and terminated by

    'End of secondary' 1 0.  '0'  0.  0.  0.  0.  0.  0.  0.  0.  0.  0.  0.

"Database secondary species" are written in every case as the
destruction one mole of the secondary species. Using the standard
convention, therefore, the stoichiometric coefficient for the secondary
species is assumed to be --1, even though this is not explicitly given
in the database. The format for a "database secondary species" is:

    <'SpeciesName'> <Number of species in reaction (integer)> <Stoichiometric coefficient> <'SpeciesName'> <Stoichiometric coefficient> <'SpeciesName'> ...<Log K array> <Debye-Huckel size parameter> <Charge> <Molecular weight>

In this format, the number of pairs of stoichiometric coefficients and
species names is determined by the preceding value in "Number of species
in reaction" (if there is a mismatch, a read error will result). The
length of the "Log K" array is given by the number following
'temperature points' in the first line of the database file. Normally,
eight temperature points are used following the EQ3 database format, for
example:

    'temperature points '  8  0.  25.  60.  100.  150.  200.  250.  300.

In this example, log K values for the reaction will be provided at eight
temperatures between 0C and 300C.

An example of an entry for the species CO2(aq) is given by:

    'CO2(aq)' 3  -1.00 'H2O'  1.00 'H+'  1.00 'HCO3-' -6.5804 -6.3447 -6.2684 -6.3882 -6.7235 -7.1969 -7.7868 -8.5280 3.0 0.0 44.0098

#### Input File Entry of Secondary Species

The secondary species list provides the additional aqueous species used
in a reactive transport problem. If the user selects the
*database_sweep* option in the **RUNTIME** keyword block, however, the
code will automatically load all possible secondary species, ignoring
the user's list. However, when this option is selected, the code will
stop after speciating the geochemical conditions. To use the set of
secondary species generated by the *database_sweep* option, the user
needs to formally copy and paste the secondary species list into the
**SECONDARY_SPECIES** keyword block and turn off the *database_sweep*
option. The list of secondary species generated by the database sweep
are found in the output file "'input filename prefix'.out" which is
generated every time a run with CrunchFlow is carried out. This is done
because of the large number of potentially extraneous species which may
be loaded for a particular problem, especially in the case of organics.
The disadvantage of the approach is that the user may potentially
neglect some important secondary species (i.e., those which have
non-trivial concentrations in a particular problem). The recommended
procedure is to begin a problem by running the code in *database_sweep*
mode and then winnowing the list of secondary species *if necessary*. In
most one-dimensional problems, the full list of secondary species may be
used (with the exception of problems where a huge list of organic
species may be loaded).

The format for listing secondary species in the input file is the same
as the format for primary species. Secondary species to be included are
listed on separate lines within the **SECONDARY_SPECIES** keyword block.
If the database sweep option has been chosen previously, secondary
species written to the file "'input filename prefix'.out" may be copied
and then pasted into the input file. As with primary species, the input
is case-sensitive---the species listed must be found in the database or
an error message will result.

<u>Example:</u>

    SECONDARY_SPECIES
    OH-
    AlOH++
    HCO3-
    END
